Main FAQs
What is the Nutrionist AI ChatBot?
The Nutrionist AI chatbot is your friendly, AI-powered assisstant that can answer commonly questions about dietitians, details on food and other information on healthy eating and healthy living. Our nutrionist ai chatbot is available 24/7

What is a healthy diet?
A healthy eating pattern is one that provides enough of each essential nutrient from nutrient-dense foods, contains a variety of foods from all of the basic food groups, and focuses on balancing calories consumed with calories expended to help you achieve and sustain a healthy weight. This eating pattern limits intake of solid fats, sugar, salt (sodium) and alcohol. Additional information on the Dietary Guidelines for Americans is available at https://www.dietaryguidelines.gov/

I would like to get advice about my eating habits. Who should I talk to?
Registered Dietitian Nutritionists (RDN) are health professionals who are trained to provide counseling on nutrition and eating habits. An RDN can provide personalized dietary advice taking into consideration your health status, lifestyle, and food likes and dislikes. 

How many servings from each food group do I need each day?
The number of servings you need each day from each food group depends on your calorie needs. 

How is food digested?
Digestion begins in the mouth, when we chew and swallow, and is completed in the small intestine. Digestion involves the mixing of food, its movement through the digestive tract, and the breakdown of food into smaller molecules. The digestive process varies for different kinds of food.

What foods cause gas and bloating?
There are many possible causes of gas and bloating, including:
Swallowing more air than usual (e.g. when chewing gum or drinking carbonated [fizzy] drinks)
Eating certain foods or drinks (e.g. “sugar-free” products made with sugar alcohols)
Having certain digestive disorders (e.g. Celiac Disease, gastritis, Irritable Bowel Syndrome [IBS], or food allergies and intolerances)
Causes of digestive discomfort vary from person to person. If you are concerned, talk to your doctor. They can help you find out why you are having symptoms and how you can make them better.

How can I get nutrition advice about a medical condition?
Counseling:
Talk with your doctor or other health professional about referring you to a registered dietitian nutritionist (RDN). An RDN can provide personalized dietary advice taking into consideration your health status (such as other medical conditions), lifestyle, and food likes and dislikes.
The Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics has a Find a Nutrition Expert online tool that allows you to locate an RDN in your geographical area with particular specialties (such as weight control, diabetes, digestive disorders, etc.). Be advised that this list may not include all RDNs in your area.
Check with your local health department, hospitals, clinics, and Cooperative Extension for classes such as those on weight management, diabetes, etc.
Web information:
For background information, you may find it helpful to look on the Web. Information obtained online, however, does not take the place of personalized advice from a qualified health professional, and some websites have inaccurate or misleading information. 

Do I need a vitamin or mineral supplement?
The Dietary Guidelines for Americans recommends that nutrient needs be met mostly from eating a variety of foods and beverages. However, vitamin or mineral supplements may be useful when it is not possible to otherwise meet your nutrient needs, such as during pregnancy or with certain medical conditions.

What supplements can help with weight loss?
There is no proof that dietary supplements for weight loss are effective. As with other dietary supplements, weight loss supplements do not need to be tested for safety or effectiveness before they are sold. Lifestyle changes, including a healthy diet and regular exercise, can be a sustainable approach for weight loss. 

How long can I keep leftover food?
Leftovers can stay fresh for different amounts of time, depending on the type of food.

How can I burn off my stored body fat?
We all need some body fat, but if stored fat is excessive it may increase risk of diet-related diseases such as heart disease, diabetes, and some cancers. This is particularly true if excess fat is in the abdominal area. According to the CDC, a body mass index, or BMI, of 25 or higher is an indication that your weight may be unhealthy. Also, a waist circumference of over 40 inches in men and over 35 inches in women indicates excessive abdominal fat if BMI is 25 or higher.
The best strategy for losing excess weight and stored body fat involves calorie reduction, increased physical activity, and a behavior change plan

How many calories do I need to burn to lose a pound of weight?
You need to burn off 3,500 calories more than you take in to lose 1 pound. This translates into a reduction of 500 calories per day to lose 1 pound in a week, or 1000 calories per day to lose 2 pounds in a week. (1-2 pounds per week is generally considered to be a safe rate of weight loss.) This can be achieved by eating fewer calories or using up more through physical activity. A combination of both is best.

I'm on a diet to lose weight. Do I still need to exercise?
Physical activity is a key component of helping you move toward a healthier weight, as it can help you achieve the appropriate calorie balance. People who exercise regularly may be more likely to keep the weight from coming back after losing weight.

I would like to gain weight. How can I do this in a healthy manner?
Losing, gaining or staying at the same weight all depend on how many calories you eat and how many calories your body uses over time. If you eat more calories than you use, you will gain weight; conversely, if you eat fewer calories than you use, you will lose weight.
Because many Americans are overweight, there are many resources geared toward losing weight. Some of these resources explain the principles of weight balance and can provide guidance for you to gain weight in a healthy manner; you will just need to focus on portion sizes for weight gain, rather than weight loss.
If you would like personalized advice, or you want to know how many calories or what types of foods are best for you, Registered Dietitians (RD) are health professionals who can physically assess you and your needs. In the United States, the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics has a referral service to registered dietitians. 

What is the difference between calories and kilocalories?
The "calorie" we refer to in food is actually kilocalorie. One (1) kilocalorie is the same as one (1) Calorie (upper case C). A kilocalorie is the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of 1 kilogram of water one degree Celsius.

What is the healthiest alcohol?
While there are types of alcohol that are lower in calories, and/or alcohol overall, there is no healthier type of alcohol. All alcohol is considered a toxin, and the liver works hard to process it as quickly as possible. For this reason, no matter what type of alcohol you consume, the less of it you drink, the better from a health perspective.

What is the best type of oil for cooking?
With exceptionally high levels of antioxidants that help to protect our cells from damage, olive oil has one of the highest proportions of monounsaturated fat and the lowest proportion of saturated fat of all the cooking oils available. While many Europeans believe olive oil is best for salad dressings or to dip bread into rather than cook with, good quality Australian extra virgin olive oil is so rich in natural antioxidants that it helps protect the oil from molecular damage at high temperatures. Compare this with imported oils, which may be blended with inferior oils, making them not as good for cooking. This means as long as you opt for Australian extra virgin olive oil, it is the only oil you need in your kitchen.

Should I avoid fruit?
Carbohydrate-based foods, including bread, rice, cereals, pasta and fruit, are digested in the body into individual glucose molecules that can be used as fuel for the muscles and the brain. While all fresh fruits contain the naturally occurring sugar fructose, which is metabolised in the liver, it is not better or worse than any other sugar when consumed in moderation (i.e., two to three serves of fresh fruit each day). On the other hand, more processed forms of fruit, as found in juice and dried fruit, are much more concentrated in energy and sugars. So when it comes to fruit, fresh is always best.

What are healthy fats?
Unsaturated fats, like monounsaturated and polyunsaturated, that can lower your risk for heart disease or stroke are considered good for you. For monounsaturated fats, think olive, canola, peanut, and sunflower oils, as well as avocados and most nuts. Polyunsaturated fats are in corn and soybean oils and in walnuts, sesame, pumpkin and flax seeds. Omega-3 fatty acids are a type of polyunsaturated fat in salmon, mackerel, tuna, and trout.

How Many Fruits and Vegetables Should I Eat?
At least half your plate should consist of fruits and vegetables. You can't get all the nutrients you need from a single fruit or vegetable, so it's important to consume a variety of both. Men and women between the ages of 19 and 50 should aim for 2-1/2 to 3 cups of veggies per day and 1-1/2 to 2 cups of fruit. 

What Are Probiotics and Prebiotics
Tiny microbes referred to as probiotics in fermented foods, like yogurt, may aid digestive function, regularity and improve overall immune health. Prebiotics can affect the growth of immune-boosting helpful bacteria throughout your gastrointestinal tract.

How Much Protein Should I Eat?
Adults need a minimum of .8 grams of protein per kilogram of body weight per day, or a little more than 7 grams of protein per 20 pounds of body weight. Athletes and those who exercise regularly will need more. Protein is found throughout the body, and is critical for cell and organ function, as well as repairing and rebuilding muscle tissue after exercise.

How Much Protein in Chicken?
Chicken comes in a variety of cuts, providing between 24 and 32 grams of protein per 100 grams, depending on the cut. All chicken is high in protein, breasts providing the highest protein count.

Beef 101:
Beef is primarily composed of protein and varying amounts of fat. 100g of broided grounded beef contains 26.1 grams of protein and 11.8 gram of fat

How Much Protein Should I Eat?
Adults need a minimum of .8 grams of protein per kilogram of body weight per day, or a little more than 7 grams of protein per 20 pounds of body weight. Athletes and those who exercise regularly will need more. Protein is found throughout the body, and is critical for cell and organ function, as well as repairing and rebuilding muscle tissue after exercise.

How Much Caffeine Is Safe?
Most health experts agree that up to 400 mg per day is safe for average adults. However, expecting mothers and small children should limit caffeine intake. An 8-oz cup of coffee contains about 100 mg of caffeine, while a 12-oz soda contains about 50 mg.

Fruit vs vegetables: which is healthiest?
Eating a diet that is richer in fruit and veg has been linked to a lower risk of heart and circulatory disease. But most of us still aren’t getting the minimum five recommended daily portions.
Advice about fruit and veg varies around the world. Some countries set the recommended amounts at higher levels, and specify how much should be fruits compared to vegetables. And there are some concerns about the effect of natural sugars in fruits for people with diabetes.
But UK guidelines don’t recommend a particular split of fruit and veg, just that we have a variety each day. This is to help give us the wide range of nutrients that fruit and vegetables provide, and it also applies to people with diabetes.

