


Carbohydrates – The Master Fuel
A diet rich in carbohydrates can support optimal performance of both endurance
and intermittent high intensity activity through fueling and refueling internal
carbohydrate stores, or glycogen, found in the muscles and liver. It is well
documented that during times of intense training or competition, such as during
tournaments or with two-a-day practices, replenishing muscle glycogen is
essential to maintaining a high level of performance. Consuming carbohydrates
during workouts lasting more than one hour can also benefit performance
and delay onset of fatigue. Studies have shown that athletes who participate
in intermittent sports, such as basketball and soccer, should also focus on
consuming more carbohydrates during training and competition. This is not
surprising since it is well-known that carbohydrates, when compared to protein
and dietary fat, are the most efficiently broken down and metabolized form of
energy for the body.

Recommended Intake of Carbohydrates
Depending upon the training routine, athletes should consume anywhere from
3-12 grams of carbohydrates per kilogram of bodyweight throughout the day. This
percentage is only a guideline for estimating carbohydrate needs. Depending
upon the length and type of training sessions, an athlete’s carbohydrate intake
should adjust, with longer times and more intense trainings reflecting the higher
number of grams needed. See Table 1 to calculate grams of carbohydrates
needed.


— FYI (focus on

2

		
Table 1:

DETERMINING GRAMS OF CARBOHYDRATE FOR ATHLETES’ NEEDS

The following example shows how to calculate the recommended grams of carbohydrate
needed per pound of body weight.
Weight in Kilograms
68 (150 lbs.)

Carbohydrates in Grams
x

4

Daily Carbohydrate Intake
=

272 grams

Now calculate your own needs. Remember to divide your body weight in pounds by
2.2 to get your weight in kilograms. Then multiply your body weight by a number of
carbohydrate grams (from the 3-12 range) based on the time and intensity of the training.
For example, an hour per day of moderate intensity exercise may warrant using 5 grams.
Weight in Kilograms

Carbohydrates in Grams
x

Daily Carbohydrate Intake
=

Carbohydrate Intake Before, During, and After Exercise
Before Exercise: The pre-exercise or pre-training meal serves two purposes:
F

It keeps the athlete from feeling hungry before and during exercise.

F

It maintains optimal levels of energy for the exercising muscles.

Consuming a small, well-tolerated carbohydrate rich snack like a granola bar,
pretzels, or dried fruit within about 30 minutes of activity can help top off
carbohydrate stores to enter training or competition with optimal muscle glycogen.

, SCIENTISTS OBSERVED
CISE COULD BE IMPROVED
OHYDRATES IN THE DIET.

n your intake) —

3

Because the pre-event meal plays a key role in optimizing glycogen stores, managing
satiety entering the activity, and minimizing any gastrointestinal upset from foods, it
is important to be strategic about types and amounts of foods in this meal.
The following are guidelines for the pre-event meal:
F

The meal should be eaten 3-4 hours before an event.

F

	It should provide 3-4 grams of carbohydrate per kilogram of body weight.

F

	To avoid stomach upset, the carbohydrate content of meals should be
reduced the closer the meals are to the event (1-2 grams per kilogram 1-2
hours before the event).

F

	Include a small to moderate portion of lean protein. Protein takes longer to
be digested, which increases satiety after eating. It also supports energy
regulation, as protein can slow absorption of carbohydrates for a more
steady energy release from a meal.

F

	If competing in hot/humid climates, or if an athlete is a salty sweater, be
sure food is well seasoned with salt and/or include a beverage containing
sodium, like a sports drink.

F

	Avoid high fiber and high fat foods and preparations. Too much of these
foods can lead to gastrointestinal upset during an event or training.

[For example, four hours before the event, it is suggested that the athlete consume 1.5 grams of carbohydrates
per pound of body weight, whereas one hour before the competition, the athlete would consume 0.5 grams of
carbohydrates per pound of body weight.]

Table 2:
		

SUGGESTED MEALS FOR PRE-EVENT EATING

Use these meal and snack ideas to fuel appropriately with carbohydrates based on the
time between eating and the event.
1 hour or less		

4

Serving size

Grams of carbohydrates

Fresh fruit (chopped apple)

1 cup

19 g

Dried mango

3 oz

28 g

Raisins

small box (2.5 oz)

34 g

Banana

7 oz

31 g

Granola bar

2 bar pack

29 g

Pretzels

20 pieces

22 g

Fig bar (2)

1 oz

20 g

Applesauce

4 oz

14 g

Sports drink*

8 oz

14 g

Toast

1 slice

14 g

Crackers

5 crackers

10 g

		

SUGGESTED MEALS FOR PRE-EVENT EATING (continued)

2-3 hours before		

Serving size

Grams of carbohydrates

Cereal (whole grain)/
low-fat milk (1%)

cereal: 1 cup
milk: 1/2 cup

cereal: 47 g
milk: 6 g

Bagel (whole grain)
with peanut butter

1 bagel
peanut butter: 2 tbsp

bagel: 47 g
peanut butter: 8 g

Fruit smoothie

12 fl oz

47 g

Fruit and nut food bar

1 bar

43 g

Oatmeal (instant)/
low-fat milk (1%)

oatmeal: 1/2 cup
milk: 1 cup

oatmeal: 13 g
milk: 12 g

Flavored Greek yogurt (nonfat)
Pancakes/waffles
		

4 or more hours before

1 cup

27 g

2 pancakes
(5” diameter)

20 g

Serving size

Grams of carbohydrates

Spaghetti with meat sauce

2-3 cups

75-100 g

Pasta/
Chicken/
Vegetables

pasta: 1 cup
chicken: 4 oz
vegetables: 1 cup

pasta: 40 g
chicken: 0 g
vegetables: 6 g

Salmon, halibut, or shrimp/
rice/
fruit (grapes)

chicken: 3 oz
rice: 6 oz
fruit: 1 cup

chicken: 0 g
rice: 44 g
fruit: 25 g

Snack bar
(oatmeal raisin walnut)/
sports drink*

1 bar

bar: 25-45 g

drink: 8 oz

drink: 14 g

Ready-to-drink high protein shake

12 fl oz

40 g

Turkey sandwich
made with deli turkey, whole wheat
bread, light mayo, tomato, and
lettuce, baby carrots on the side

turkey: 3 oz. or slices
mayo: 1 tbsp
bread: 2 slices
7 carrots

turkey: 0 g
mayo: 0 g
bread: 30 g
carrots: 3 g

Tuna sandwich
(2 slices whole wheat bread)/
nonfat mayo

tuna: 2 oz drained
bread: 2 slices
mayo: 1 tbsp

tuna: 0 g
bread: 30 g
mayo: 0 g

Fruit and nut trail mix

1/3 cup

20 g

*Remember that sports drinks are beverages that contain electrolytes and carbohydrates, not caffeine and other
stimulants. For more information on sports drinks and hydration, read the Fluids and Hydration section.

5

Eating At All-Day Events:
It is important that athletes eat after competing to make sure that they will have
enough energy in the muscles for the next race or competition, whether it be in the
same day or the following days. The same dietary intake principles used to plan the
pre-exercise meal can also apply to foods eaten at all-day events. If an athlete races
at 10 a.m. and again after 2 hours, foods that are high in protein and fat will more
than likely still be in the stomach, potentially causing stomach or gastrointestinal
(GI) distress. The following guidelines have been recommended to help athletes
make wise food choices at all-day events.
One hour or less between events or heats:
F

	Stick with carbohydrates that are in liquid form, such as sports drinks.

F

	If something solid needs to be eaten, try fruits like oranges, watermelon,
cantaloupe, peaches, pears, applesauce, or bananas.

These foods consist of mostly carbohydrates and water. They are digested very fast and
therefore, will not cause as much of a problem with stomach cramping or GI distress.
Along with types of foods, amount of food consumed is important to consider in this
situation. It is wise to consume a small, well-tolerated portion of food when little
time is available to allow for digestion. The more an athlete eats, the longer it will
take to digest, especially with any pre-competition nerves or stress.
Two to three hours between events or heats:
F

	Foods containing carbohydrates and some protein can be eaten, as there is
enough time to digest them before competition.

F

	Easy carbohydrate and protein containing combinations include cereal
with low-fat milk, a granola bar, jerky and fruit, pretzels and a cheese stick,
chocolate milk, or an English muffin with a little nut butter.

F

	Be sure to drink plenty of fluids, like water or a sports drink, for hydration,
electrolyte replacement, and restoration of glycogen stores. Avoid drinks that
contain caffeine, carbonation, and other stimulants.

Four or more hours between events or heats:
It may be necessary to have a meal when four or more hours exist between events.
Use the same guidelines for a pre-event meal in this situation. Choose a meal that
is higher in carbohydrates, moderate in protein, and low to moderate in fat. Meal
examples include:

6

F

	A turkey sandwich on two slices of whole wheat bread, Greek yogurt with fruit,
and water or a sports (fluid replacement) drink

F

	Spaghetti with lean meatballs, bread, salad with dressing, and water or a sports
(fluid replacement) drink

If there is a certain meal pattern before competition that an athlete thinks is a
winning combination, then they should stick to it.
Athletes who make food choices at concession stands need to know how to make
the best choices. Most concession stands are filled with high-fat, high-calorie foods
that are not designed to maximize performance. It is always wiser for athletes to
pack a cooler from home with winning combinations, than to rely on the food at a
concession stand. Table 3 has a list of nutrient-dense foods that are easy to pack in
a cooler and will help supply energy throughout the day.
During Exercise:
Consuming carbohydrates during exercise lasting longer than 60 minutes ensures
that the muscles receive adequate amounts of energy, especially during the
later stages of the competition or workout. This has also been found to improve
performance. The form of carbohydrates consumed does matter. Some athletes
prefer to use a sports drink, whereas others prefer to eat solid or gel forms of
carbohydrates. Use the following guidelines when consuming sports drinks with
carbohydrates.
F

	Consume 6-12 ounces of a sports drink with 6-8% carbohydrate
concentration every 15-30 minutes during exercise (see Table 4). One
gulp is about 2 ounces.

F

	Water is needed to aid in absorption of the carbohydrate. Drinks with
a concentration greater than 10% are often associated with abdominal
cramps, nausea, and diarrhea.

F

	For high intensity activities, sports drinks and gels containing multiple
forms of sugar can increase absorption and delivery of carbohydrates.

Note: Sports drinks should not be confused with “energy” drinks. “Energy” drinks
typically contain one or more stimulants and their carbohydrate concentration is
usually greater than 10%.
*Sports drinks are beverages that contain electrolytes and
carbohydrates, not caffeine and other stimulants.

7

IT IS BEST NOT TO TRY
DIFFERENT AND NEW FOODS
BEFORE AN IMPORTANT
COMPETITION. IF AN
ATHLETE IS COMPLAINING
OF GI DISTRESS OR STOMACH
CRAMPING, HE OR SHE
SHOULD TRY DIFFERENT
FOODS OR USE THESE
GUIDELINES. ATHLETES
SHOULD KEEP A FOOD LOG
IN ADDITION TO THEIR
TRAINING LOG. THEY SHOULD
TRACK WHAT THEY’RE
EATING BEFORE, DURING,
AND AFTER TRAINING AND
HOW IT AFFECTS THEIR
PERFORMANCE, BOTH
MENTALLY AND PHYSICALLY.
— FYI (focus on your intake) —

8

		
Table 3:

COOLER FUELERS
Food

Serving Size

Fat

Carbohydrates

Protein

Baby carrots

7 carrots

0g

3g

0g

Peanut butter pretzels

8 pieces

7g

15 g

5g

Celery

1 large stalk

0g

2g

0g

Cherry tomatoes

1/2 cup

0g

7g

1g

Chocolate milk (lowfat)

1 cup

2g

26 g

8g

String cheese

2 sticks

12 g

2g

16 g

Dried mango

1 package

0g

56 g

4g

Sports drink*

8 oz

0g

14 g

0g

Snack bar
(oatmeal raisin walnut)

1 bar

5g

43 g

10 g

Fresh fruit

1 piece or 1 cup

<1 g

19 g

.3 g

Hummus

1/4 cup

5g

13 g

3g

High protein milk shake

1 bottle (12 fl oz)

4.5 g

40 g

20 g

Nuts (mixed)

1/4 cup

15 g

7g

5g

Peanut butter

2 tbsp

16 g

7g

8g

Pita bread
(whole wheat large pita)

1 pita

2g

35 g

6g

Pretzels

1 cup

Xg

Xg

Xg

1 g per slice

0 g per slice

5 g per slice

0g
bread: 1 slice

0g
5g

0 g		
24 g 2 g

0g

3g

<1 g

Turkey sandwich
turkey: 1 slice
(3 slices deli meat, 		
mustard,
mustard: 1 tbsp
		
2 slices whole
wheat bread),		
baby carrots
7 carrots
Vanilla wafers

4 wafers

10 g

19 g

<1 g

Whole grain bagel

1 bagel (4 oz)

1.5 g

47 g

11 g

Whole grain cereal

1 cup

1g

47 g

7g

Whole grain crackers

5 crackers

15 g

11 g

1g

Pretzels

1 cup

1.2 g

32 g

4g

9

Table 4: CALCULATING CARBOHYDRATE CONCENTRATIONS IN BEVERAGES
To assess the concentration of a fluid replacement drink or any beverage, use the
following calculations:
Amount of carbohydrate in grams (from the label)

x 100 = percentage

The volume in one serving (use 240 ml per cup)

Example:		15 grams
240 ml
		

=

.0625 x 100 = 6%

*Remember that sports drinks are beverages that contain electrolytes and carbohydrates, not caffeine and other
stimulants. For more information on sports drinks and hydration, read the Fluids and Hydration section.

After Exercise:
Recovery nutrition is beneficial for all athletes to help them recover more quickly
in preparation for the next event or training session and to maximize the adaptive
benefits of exercise. Carbohydrates and protein are the two main macronutrients to
focus on for optimal recovery. Consuming a carbohydrate snack as soon as possible
after training will allow the body to start replenishing glycogen stores in the body.
Additionally, consuming a couple of mixed meals high in carbohydrates within
six hours after training or a competition ensures that the muscles continue with
glycogen restoration.
F	Maximize muscle glycogen recovery after an intense or long training session

or event with 1-1.2 g carbs per kilogram of body weight per hour for the first
4 hours following the activity. This refueling strategy is most important after
a very hard training session and with another important session or event in
the next 24 hours.
F	Include a moderate amount of protein (15-30 g) in the recovery meal or

snack to best support muscle repair and adaptation to exercise. Continue
to include protein in meals and snacks spaced out about every 3-4 hours
following the activity.
F	Table 5 and 6 list recovery tips and examples

of recovery snacks.

10

		
Table 5:

POST-EXERCISE RECOVERY TIPS

To refill energy in the muscle with trainings less than 8 hours apart, eat as soon as
possible after exercise and then every 15-30 minutes for up to 4 hours.
Choose higher-carbohydrate foods, such as bagels, pasta, fruits, yogurts, cereal with
low-fat milk, peanut butter, sports drinks, granola bars, french toast, sub sandwiches,
baked potatoes with chili, smoothie made with fruit, fruit juice, yogurt, and frozen yogurt.
Include protein to aid in muscle recovery and promote muscle growth.
If you can’t consume solid foods as soon as possible after exercise, try 2-4 cups of a
sports drink, then consume solid food within 4 hours post-exercise.
Consume 1-1.2 g of carbohydrates per kilogram of body weight per hour for the first
4 hours after glycogen-depleting exercise. Be sure to rehydrate as well (see Table 12).

RECOVERY IS
ESSENTIAL TO
PERFORMANCE.
BE SURE TO REFUEL
AND REHYDRATE
AFTER A WORKOUT
OR GAME.
		
Table 6:

RECOVERY SNACK IDEAS
Fruit and yogurt smoothie
Cheese sticks and fruit
Hard boiled eggs and whole grain crackers
Cereal with milk
Fruit and Greek yogurt
Pita and hummus
Chocolate milk (lowfat)

11

Protein’s Role As A Team Player
Protein has always been a particularly popular nutrient with athletes because of
its role in building and maintaining muscles. Indeed, athletes need to consume a
wide variety of high-quality protein foods in their diets. However, while protein
is necessary for rebuilding and repairing muscles, it is not the primary fuel, and
consuming more protein than what the body can use is not going to give athletes
larger and stronger muscles. While research shows that protein requirements are
higher for athletes to aid in muscle repair and growth, most athletes are already
consuming more protein than the body can use. Use the following formulas as
guidelines to ensure proper amounts of protein are included in your dietary intake.

		
Table 7:

DAILY PROTEIN RECOMMENDATIONS

Type of Training

Grams (g) of Protein Recommended		

Endurance

1.4-1.8 g of protein per kilogram of body weight

Strength
(to gain muscle mass)

1.6-2.0 g of protein per kilogram of body weight

Strength (maintenance)

1.6-1.7 g of protein per kilogram of body weight

Weight Restricted

1.8-2.2 g of protein per kilogram of body weight

To calculate protein requirements per pound of body weight, use Table 8.

12

		
Table 8:

PROTEIN REQUIREMENTS IN GRAMS PER POUND OF BODY WEIGHT

To calculate the amount of protein your body needs on a daily basis, simply take your body weight in
pounds and multiply it by the appropriate recommendation. For example, the range of protein for a
84.1 kilogram (185 pound) soccer player is 118-143 grams daily.
Weight In Kilograms		

Protein In Grams		

Daily Protein Intake

84.1

x

1.4

=

118 g

84.1

x

1.7

=

143 g

Calculate your own protein needs. Refer to Table 7 to get the recommended grams of protein for your
type of training, and calculate both the low and the high values to get a range of appropriate protein
for your daily intake.
Weight In Kilograms		

Protein In Grams		

		

x		=

		

x

Daily Protein Intake

=

Table 9 provides additional information to translate this information into servings of protein-rich food.

		
Table 9:

PROTEIN CONTENT OF COMMONLY CONSUMED FOODS
Food

Serving size

Grams of protein

Chicken breast

3 oz

22 g

Ground beef

3 oz

22 g

Broiled fish

3 oz

20 g

Cottage cheese

1/2 cup

12 g

Greek yogurt

8 oz

25 g

Cooked lentils

1/2 cup

9g

Cooked black beans

1/2 cup

8g

Milk

1 cup

8g

Peanut butter

2 tbsp

7g

String cheese

1 oz

7g

Extra firm tofu

3 oz

8g

Egg

1 large or 2 egg whites

6g

Mixed nuts

1/4 cup

5g

Cooked quinoa

1 cup

8g

Whole wheat bread

1 slice

3g

13

Protein After Exercise
The body’s ability to recover from games, practices, or intense workouts requires
adequate rest and proper nutrition. An important component of the recovery process
is consuming both carbohydrates and protein shortly after exercise to restore muscle
glycogen and stimulate muscle protein synthesis.

EAT
Keep in mind that food is fuel and athletes should not come to practice or games
without having had enough food to support the energy requirements for their sport.
To keep athletes properly fueled and have their protein needs met, use the EAT
guidelines:

Eat breakfast. It is the best way to start the day well fueled.
Include foods that contain carbohydrates and protein, such as
nonfat milk, yogurt, or eggs.

Add carbohydrates and protein to post-exercise meals.
Some energy bars provide carbohydrates to replenish muscle
glycogen stores and protein to help build and repair muscles.

Toss the supplements. Athletes should rely on protein
from food sources first, instead of supplements. This helps
ensure that diets are balanced for health and performance.
In addition to meat sources of protein, dairy products, nuts,
and seeds are all rich sources of protein and can easily be
added to any meal or snack.

S TU D I ES H AV E SH OWN T H
C A RB O HYD R AT ES TO PR OT E
C H O CO L ATE MILK , WIT H IN 45
SE SSI O N C A N R ED U C E MUSC LE DA
M U SCL E R EPA I R A N D GR OW T H, IN
A N D I NCREA S E TH E R AT E OF MUS
FOR AT L EA S T 40 GR AMS OF C A

— FYI (focus on
14

Building Body Mass
Many athletes want to add more bulk to their bodies in the form of lean muscle.
Many supplement products claim to build muscles. Athletes should take special
caution when considering supplementation (please see Supplements and Your
Health section for additional information and cautions). Due to the limited
regulations of the dietary supplement industry, there is a risk of products being
contaminated with sport-prohibited or unknown substances with or without the
manufacturer knowing. There is no guarantee that the product contents match with
those listed on the label. Taking a lot of extra protein either from supplements or
food does not guarantee bigger muscles. If it did, athletes could spend time lounging
instead of lifting to build muscle.
The following are healthy ways to build muscle:
F	Follow a strength training program that challenges muscles.
F	Add 500 to 1,000 more calories each day to current dietary intake, to allow the

body to use protein already present in the diet for muscle growth and not be
broken down to fuel activity.
F	Eat foods that are both high in carbohydrates and proteins like grilled chicken

sandwiches, peanut butter sandwiches, and Greek yogurt with granola.
F	Choose low-fat sources of both carbohydrates and protein. For example, choose

a baked potato over French fries, or grilled chicken over fried chicken.
F	Eat protein throughout the day to best support muscle growth. Aim for

0.3 grams/kilogram of body weight, or about 15-20 grams of protein, every
3-4 hours.

AT EAT I N G A 4:1 R ATI O O F
I N, SUC H A S 16 O U N CE S O F
5 MI NUTE S AFTER A TR A I N I N G
AMAGE AN D SO RENES S, I NC R EA SE
N CREAS E T R A I NI N G A DA P TAT ION,
S CLE GLYCOGEN REP L E TI O N. A IM
A R B S TO 10 GR AMS O F P R OT EIN.

n your intake) —
15

Fat as Fuel
Fat Intake in Athletes
Fat is the primary fuel for light to moderate intensity exercise. Fat is a valuable
metabolic fuel for muscles during endurance exercise and performs many
important functions in the body, although it does not provide quick bursts of energy
needed for speed.
The more efficient an athlete becomes in their respective sport, the easier it is for
them to operate at a lower intensity while maintaining the same level of work or
maintaining the same speed (metabolic efficiency).
Stored fat provides an abundant source of energy. A 150-pound athlete with a
relatively low 6% body fat carries 1,500-2,000 calories in the form of glycogen and
45,000 calories in the form of stored fat. Fat stores play an important role in fueling
athletes in situations where glycogen has been depleted and no foods are being
consumed.
Research has shown that metabolic adaptations do occur as a result of high fat
fueling, although claims that high fat, carbohydrate-restricted diets improve
performance in competitive athletes have not been proven.
For athletes that require bursts of power in their sport, such as in gymnastics,
soccer, basketball, baseball, boxing, figure skating, swimming, and rowing, a high fat
diet is not recommended to support optimal performance.
Foods that contain fat can generally be categorized by containing mostly saturated
or unsaturated fat. Foods high in saturated fat include fatty meats, high-fat dairy like
whole milk or ice cream, coconut oil, palm oil, butter, and ghee. To support heart
health and minimize inflammation, saturated fat intake should be limited.
Foods rich in unsaturated fat include nuts, seeds, avocado and avocado oil, olives
and olive oil, vegetable oils, and fatty fish like salmon. Support optimal health and
performance by getting most dietary fats from unsaturated fat sources.

16

Athletes should consume 20-35% of total calories from fat, focusing on most
fat calories coming from unsaturated sources. Too little fat intake can lead to
issues such as low energy intake and availability, and even decreased production
of hormones. Too much fat in the diet can lead to unwanted weight gain and an
undesirable body composition. A standard American dietary pattern is usually
high in fat, so athletes need to pay attention to where fat is coming from in their
diet to keep their intake in a healthy, performance-supporting range.
		
Table 10: SUBSTITUTIONS FOR REDUCING FAT INTAKE
Instead of:

Try:

Whole milk

Skim, 1%, or 2% milk

Ice cream
		

Higher protein ice cream, avocado ice cream, 		
100% real fruit popsicles

Sour cream

Plain Greek yogurt

Bacon

Canadian or turkey bacon

80% or 85% lean

90 or 93% lean beef or turkey

ground beef or turkey
Fried chicken
Doughnuts and pastries
		

Baked, roasted, seared, or grilled chicken
100% whole grain breads,
homemade whole grain breads

Apple pie

Baked or raw apple

Cookies, cakes, or brownies

Peanut butter pretzels, dried fruit, trail mix

French fries

Baked or roasted potatoes

Gut Health
Probiotics are live microorganisms that populate the gut with healthy bacteria.
In turn, healthy bacteria in the gut helps to support the body’s immune system,
leading to fewer respiratory illnesses and the prevention of a multitude of medical
conditions. Probiotics are naturally found in fermented foods like yogurt, kefir,
kombucha, sauerkraut, kimchi, tempeh and miso. While there are supplemental
forms of probiotics available, it is best and safest to consume them from food
sources.
Prebiotics can be thought of as the food for beneficial gut bacteria. Food is the
best way to get prebiotics in your diet, which usually come in the form of fiber from
plants. Great food sources of prebiotics include onion, garlic, pears, apple, banana,
whole wheat, asparagus, beans, mango, Brussels sprouts, and dairy.

17

Vitamins and Minerals
Vitamins and minerals (when not consumed in food form) are classified by
the Federal Drug Administration (FDA) as dietary supplements. Amino acids,
botanicals, herbs, and substances, such as enzymes, organ tissues and glandulars,
and metabolites, are also classified as dietary supplements.
Many athletes believe they do not get enough vitamins and minerals in their
diet and wonder if they should start taking some sort of supplement; while other
athletes are on a constant quest to find the latest diet or supplement that will
give them a competitive edge. The reality is that making wise food and beverage
choices are crucial for peak performance and contribute to endurance and repair of
injured tissues. A good working knowledge and understanding of foods that provide
essential nutrients will aid in an athlete reaching their greatest potential.
Athletes have increased energy needs, which allows for more opportunities to
obtain the nutrients they need through a balanced diet composed of a variety of
natural foods. Most sports nutrition professionals agree that supplementation will
not necessarily improve performance.
However, the athlete who takes a simple one-a-day type of vitamin or mineral
that does not exceed the nutrient levels of the Recommended Dietary Allowance
(RDA)/Dietary Reference Intake (DRI), is probably not doing any harm, especially
if it is third-party tested. An athlete should consult with his or her sports dietitian,
or other health care professional, to determine whether vitamin and mineral
supplementation is needed to maintain optimal health.
Nutrients that may be low in an athlete’s diet are listed in Table 11. Choose a variety
of foods in each food category to ensure that all nutrients are included in your diet.
Athletes should always choose food over dietary supplementation. The body needs
more than 40 nutrients every day and supplements do not contain all the nutrients
that are found in food. Supplements cannot make up for a poor diet or poor
beverage choices.

18

		
Table 11: MICRONUTRIENT SOURCES
Selected
Micronutrients

B Vitamins

Vegetables
		
		
		
		
		

Leafy green
Broccoli
Tomatoes		
vegetables
Kale
Brussel sprouts		
Asparagus Turnip greens
Broccoli		
Cauliflower		
Red peppers
Sweet potatoes		
Turnip greens
Mushrooms		
Collard greens

Calcium

Vitamin C

Vitamin D

Magnesium

Selenium

Iron

Spinach
Potatoes

Green beans
Broccoli

Spinach

Fruits
Dried prunes
Fortified
Oranges		
Raisins
Banana
Raisins
		
Bananas
orange
Grapefruit		 Banana		
Dried
			
juice
Berries				 apricots
				
Kiwi
				 Mango
Grains
Whole grain
Corn tortilla
Fortified
Fortified
Whole grain
Spaghetti
Oatmeal
		
breads
Flour tortilla
breakfast
cereal
cereals
Rice
Spaghetti
		
Cereals 		
cereals		
Oatmeal		
Fortified
		
Pasta, Rice						
cereals
		
Tortillas
Dairy
Milk
Milk		 Fortified
Yogurt
Cottage
		 Yogurt
Dairy		dairy		cheese
			 products		products		 Cheddar
							
cheese
Meats
Turkey
Soybeans
Salmon
Tuna
Almonds
Lean beef
Red meat
Eggs
Pork			
Salmon
Cashews
Ham
Dark meat
Nuts
Chicken			
Sardines
Peanuts
Chicken
Chickpeas
Beans
Salmon			
Eggs
Chickpeas
Nuts
Shrimp
		 Tuna						
Tofu

Natural foods contain a matrix of various nutrients that researchers are continuing
to discover and learn more about. Often, individual nutrients don’t work as
effectively when isolated in a pill or supplement form.
Self-prescribed supplement users should heed overdose warnings and look for
symptoms of toxic levels of supplementation, such as diarrhea, skin rashes that do
not fade, and unexplained joint pain. Fat soluble vitamins (A, D, E, and K) can be toxic
when misused. Unlike water soluble vitamins in which excess amounts are excreted
in the urine, fat soluble vitamins are stored in body fat and remain in the body.
Remember that more is not always better. The established Recommended Dietary
Allowance (RDA)/Dietary Reference Intake (DRI), for vitamins and minerals are
to be used as a guide in determining nutritional needs. These allowances have a
large margin of safety built into the recommendations. Even though it has been
shown that a severely inadequate intake of certain vitamins and/or minerals can
impair performance, it is unusual for an athlete to have such severe nutritional
deficiencies. Even marginal deficiencies do not appear to markedly affect the
ability to exercise efficiently. The goal for any athlete should be to meet DRI/RDA
vitamin and mineral recommendations, as consuming more than these established
quantities has not been shown to further improve performance and excess
consumption can actually be harmful.

19

Athletes searching for a competitive edge often look to a supplement or a special
combination of nutrients to find it. However, there are no quick-fix supplements for
improving sports performance. Consuming a wide variety of foods and staying well
hydrated are the basic cornerstones to reaching athletic potential.
For athletes subject to sport drug testing, taking nutritional or dietary supplements
may cause a positive test for a prohibited substance that may not be disclosed on the
product label. In accordance with all applicable rules for a positive test result within a
sport, a sanction may be imposed.

20

Some trade associations and other businesses have programs that include analytical
testing and quality assessment of dietary supplements, culminating in a “stamp
of approval” or a “guarantee” that the supplement is safe for use in sport. These
programs may reduce the risk that a supplement is contaminated, or contains an
undisclosed ingredient. HOWEVER, it does not eliminate this risk. Athletes who take
dietary or nutritional supplements, even if claiming to be “approved” or “verified,”
do so at their own risk of committing an anti-doping rule violation, or suffering from
negative health side effects.

Supplements and Your Health
Background. Dietary supplements are defined as products containing “dietary
ingredients” intended to supplement the diet. These include vitamins, minerals,
amino acids, botanicals, herbs, and substances like enzymes, organ tissues and
glandulars, metabolites, etc.
The increased visibility of many vitamins, minerals, herbals, as well as other
dietary supplements, some argue, can be attributed to the passage of the Dietary
Supplement Health and Education Act (DSHEA) in 1994. Under DSHEA, the
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) DOES NOT evaluate any supplements for
safety or effectiveness before they are sold. The FDA will only step in and take
regulatory action after a supplement has hurt someone or made them sick. Often, a
supplement must sicken dozens or hundreds of people before the FDA takes action.
Additionally, the passing of DSHEA allowed manufacturers to publish only limited
information about the benefits of dietary supplements. It is easy for products to
get to the marketplace without pre-market controls, and if necessary, they are
extremely difficult to remove, even when serious health concerns are raised about
their safety.
The Anabolic Steroid Control Act of 2004 (SB 2195) took effect on January 20,
2005 as an amendment to the Controlled Substances Act. The Act classifies a
number of prohormones or steroid precursors, previously manufactured as dietary
supplements, as controlled substances, making their distribution illegal without a
medical prescription. According to this Act, possession and/or distribution of these
substances can be punishable by up to five years in prison.
Did you know? While some mainstream supplements are made by responsible
manufacturers, a growing number of supplement products contain dangerous and
undisclosed ingredients, including steroids, stimulants, and other dangerous drugs.
One major issue is that unscrupulous companies are marketing supplements spiked
with these dangerous substances, taking advantage of many consumers’ desires for
maximized sport performance or aesthetic improvements, and advertising them as
healthy and safe products when they’re not.

21

Most Americans are unaware that designer steroids and other dangerous drugs are
intentionally being sold as dietary supplements and that current law makes it too easy
for these products to get to the market. Best estimates suggest that there are hundreds
of supplement products currently available that contain one or more of approximately
20-25 designer steroids alone. Initial evidence of supplement contamination was
established in a 2004 market survey from an International Olympic Committee
accredited lab, during which 15% (94) of the 634 supplements analyzed were found to
contain hormones or prohormones not listed on the supplement label. Since the study,
numerous other reports of contamination, mislabeling, and alteration of supplements
have continued to surface from independent research.
Contamination can also occur. In the United States, high-profile athletes who
test positive from contaminated or intentionally spiked supplements containing
undisclosed prohibited substances can be made ineligible for competition.
Given the overall possibility of supplement contamination, the risk of taking a
mislabeled supplement is a real threat to the careers of American athletes and the
health of all consumers. Some products can be unintentionally adulterated with
substances, such as pesticides or heavy metals, while others may be inadvertently
contaminated with sport-prohibited substances due to cross-contamination. While
there certainly are supplements that are safe and pure, it is possible for one batch of a
product, for example, to become contaminated with a dangerous or sport-prohibited
substance when manufacturing equipment isn’t cleaned properly and contains
remnants of ingredients from a previous product. This is similar to what can happen
in a factory that manufactures nut products along with other products like cereals
and breads. If the machines aren’t cleaned correctly or if particles or dust permeate
manufacturing areas, the breads or cereals can contain remnants or traces of the nuts,
which can be potentially dangerous to those with nut allergies.

22

The health consequences are numerous. The consumption of these dangerous hidden
drugs, such as designer steroids, has been a known cause of liver injury, stroke, kidney
failure, and pulmonary embolism.
The inclusion of stimulants in supplement products also has the potential for harmful
effects. Some stimulants can cause increased blood pressure, irregular heart rhythm,
stroke, or even death.
Protect yourself! This is a REAL concern. Rather than relying on advertisements
from companies who are trying to sell you their product, as a consumer, you have the
responsibility to educate yourself. In the world of anti-doping, strict liability applies and
athletes are responsible for what is in their systems at the time of a drug test. Anabolic
steroids and stimulants are prohibited classes of substances in sport. It is up to the
athlete or consumer to research reliable sources of information that can point out the
many substances that are known to be included in supplements and that may, in fact,
damage one’s health or athletic career.
More Information. There is no risk-free way to choose a supplement, as the only
way to have zero risk is to not use supplements. If using a dietary supplement is
needed, the best way to reduce the risk of using a low-quality or contaminated
product is to choose one that is certified by a USADA-recommended third party.
See USADA.org/Supplement-Connect.

USADA.org/Supplement-Connect

23

Fluids and Hydration
Hydration is one of the most important nutritional concerns for an athlete.
Approximately 60% of body weight is water. As an athlete trains or competes, fluid
is lost through the skin through sweat and through the lungs while breathing. If this
fluid is not replaced at regular intervals during practice or competition, it can lead
to dehydration. A dehydrated athlete has a decreased volume of blood circulating
through the body, and consequently:
F	The amount of blood pumped with each heart beat decreases
F	Exercising muscles do not receive enough oxygen
F	Exhaustion sets in and the athlete’s performance suffers
F	By-products of exercise are not flushed out of the body as regularly

as they should be
Research has shown that losing as little as 2% of total body weight can negatively
affect athletic performance. For example, if a 150-pound athlete loses 3 pounds
during a workout or competition, their ability to perform at peak performance
due to dehydration is reduced. Proper fluid replenishment is the key to preventing
dehydration and reducing the risk of heat injury in athletes engaged in training and
competition.
Preventing Dehydration
The best way to prevent dehydration is to maintain body fluid levels by consuming
plenty of fluids before, during, and after a workout or competition. Often, athletes
do not realize that they are losing body fluids or that they are impacting their
performance through dehydration. Athletes who are not sure how much fluid to
drink can monitor hydration using two helpful techniques:
F	Weighingthemselvesbeforeandafterpracticeorcompetition.Differenceinweightcan

indicatehowmuchfluidwaslostduringtheactivityandhelpdeterminehowmuchfluid
should be replaced.
F	Checking urine color. Urine that is dark gold in color indicates dehydration. Urine

similar in color to pale lemonade is a sign of a hydrated athlete.
Many times athletes wait to drink until they are thirsty. Thirst is not an accurate
indicator of how much fluid an athlete has lost. Athletes who wait to replenish
body fluids until feeling thirsty are already dehydrated. As a matter of fact, most
individuals do not become thirsty until more than 2% of body weight is lost. Waiting
until you are thirsty can affect your performance. When athletes only drink enough
to quench their thirst, they may still be dehydrated.

24

For best results, keep a bottle of fluid available when working out and drink as
often as desired, ideally every 15-20 minutes. Table 12 lists guidelines for fluid
replacement from the National Athletic Trainers Association, the Academy of
Nutrition and Dietetics, and the American College of Sports Medicine.

		
Table 12:

GUIDELINES FOR PROPER HYDRATION

F MONITOR FLUID LOSSES: Weigh-in before and after training,
especially during hot weather and conditioning phases of the season
F F
 OR EACH KILOGRAM OR POUND lost during exercise, drink 1.5 liters for
each kg lost and 3 cups for each pound lost
F DO NOT RESTRICT fluids before, during, or after the event
F DO NOT RELY ON thirst as an indicator

URINE COLOR CHART
Overhydrated

Hydrated

Dehydrated

Extremely Dehydrated

(consult a doctor)

25

What about fluid replacement drinks?
Sports drinks containing between 6-8% carbohydrates can provide energy to the
working muscle that water cannot, which increases exercise capacity and improves
performance. It appears that athletes who consume a sports drink can maintain
blood glucose levels at a time when muscle glycogen stores are diminished. This
allows carbohydrate utilization and energy production to continue at high rates.
Research has also shown that mouth rinses with carbohydrates can improve
performance at rates similar to ingestion. Beverages containing more than one kind
of sugar (i.e., glucose and fructose) can increase carbohydrate absorption rates
because each sugar is absorbed via different channels.
How important are the electrolytes provided by fluid replacement drinks?
The ingestion of sodium during exercise may help with maintenance or restoration
of plasma volume during exercise and recovery. The consumption of sports drinks
containing sodium helps retain water in the body and aids in hydration by increasing the
absorption of fluid from the intestines into the muscles. Recent research has suggested
that a 6-8% carbohydrate sport drink with at least 110 mg of sodium per 8-ounce serving
empties from the stomach just as fast as plain water. Endurance activities lasting longer
than 3 hours may require as much as 175 mg of sodium per 8-ounce serving.
There has been concern by parents, coaches, and athletes that sports drinks may
contain too much sodium. However, many fluid replacement drinks are low in sodium.
An 8-ounce serving of a fluid replacement drink can have a sodium content similar to
that of a cup of reduced fat milk. Most Americans consume too much sodium through
processed and convenience foods, not through fluid replacement drinks.
What is an ideal fluid replacement drink?
The ideal fluid replacement beverage is one that tastes good, does not cause GI
discomfort or distress when consumed in large volumes, promotes rapid fluid
absorption and maintenance of body fluid, and provides energy to working muscles
during intense training and competition.

AVERAGE SWEAT RATES FROM NUMEROU
2.4 L/HR. AVERAGE SWEAT CONCENTRATIO
WITH THIS LEVEL OF VARIATION, IT IS IMP
THEIR OWN FLUID AND ELECTROLY TE LOS
SPORTS REGISTERED DIETITIANS TO DETE

— FYI (focus on
26

Guidelines for Fluid Replacement
The following guidelines for maintaining body fluid balance, improving performance
in the heat, and preventing heat-related illness appear to be prudent based on
current scientific knowledge.
F For intense training and long workouts, a fluid replacement drink

containing carbohydrates may provide an important source of energy. A
6-8% carbohydrate beverage is typically most effective in maintaining fluid
balance while supplying the muscles with fuel.
F	The fluid consumed during activity should contain a small amount

of sodium and electrolytes. The sodium may be beneficial for quicker
absorption and replacement of sweat loss.
F	The beverage should be palatable and taste good.
F	Don’t wait until right before exercise to start hydrating. Maintaining good

hydration throughout each day is not only important for overall health, but
helps an athlete enter a training session or event well hydrated.
F	The athlete should drink 7-12 ounces of cold fluid about 15-30 minutes

before workouts. If the workout is prolonged, choose a beverage that has a
6-8% carbohydrate concentration.
F	Drink 4-8 ounces of cold fluid during exercise at 15-20 minute intervals.
F	Start drinking early in the workout because thirst does not develop until

2% of body weight has been lost, by which time performance may have
begun to decline.
F Avoid carbonated drinks, which can cause GI distress and may decrease

the volume of fluid consumed.
F Avoid beverages containing caffeine, alcohol, and those promoted as

energy drinks.
F	If you have never had a sports drink, don’t drink one for the first time on

competition day. Practice consuming fluids while you train. Use a trial
and error approach until you discover the fluids that work well for you and
encourage hydration.

US RESEARCH STUDIES RANGE FROM 0.3ONS OF SODIUM RANGE FROM 0.5-1.8 G/L.
PORTANT FOR AN ATHLETE TO MONITOR
SSES AND WORK WITH THEIR COACHES OR
ERMINE THEIR SODIUM AND FLUID NEEDS.

n your intake) —
27

Bottom Line
Nutrition plays a critical role in athletic performance, and athletes, coaches, and
parents need to realize that making wise food choices can increase the chances
of optimal athletic performance. It is easy for athletes to fall prey to nutrition
misinformation and fad diets in the search for a quick fix to improve performance.
It is imperative that athletes stay current on accurate nutrition issues as they are
ever-changing. By making informed food choices, athletes will have an advantage
over those who choose to ignore the role that food plays in human performance.

Resources:
USADA.org/supplement-connect USADA’s Supplement Education Center
acsm.org American College of Sports Medicine
eatright.org Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics
fda.gov/food U.S. Food and Drug Administration
fda.gov/safety/recalls FDA Recalls, Market Withdrawals, & Safety Alerts
fns.usda.gov/cnpp Center for Nutrition Policy and Promotion
dietaryguidelines.gov Dietary Guidelines for Americans, 2020-2025
nutrition.gov National Agricultural Library, U.S. Department of Agriculture
health.gov/nhic National Health Information Center - U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services
sportsrd.org Collegiate and Professional Sports Dietitians Association
scandpg.org Sports, Cardiovascular, and Wellness Nutrition, a dietetic practice
group of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics
Sports, Cardiovascular, and Wellness Nutrition Dietetic Practice Group. Sports
Nutrition: A Handbook for Professionals. 6th ed., Chicago: Academy of Nutrition
and Dietetics. 6th Edition. 2017.

Acknowledgement:
A very special thanks to TrueSport Expert Stephanie Miezin, MS, RD, CSSD,
as well as all past contributors for providing the content for this publication.

Note: The content of this publication is provided for informational purposes only and is subject to change.
This information is not intended to be a substitute for professional medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment.
Individuals should always seek advice from a qualified health professional.

28

We Value Champions.
We Champion Values.

TM

Find more at the TrueSport website:
www.TrueSport.org
Join us on social:
TrueSportUSA
@TrueSport
@TrueSportUSA
linkedin.com/company/truesport
pinterest.com/truesport
tiktok.com/@usantidoping

Tag us at #TrueSportChampion,
#TrueSportMoments, and #TrueSportInAction
on Twitter and Instagram.

©2012-2023 USADA. All rights reserved. Permission to reprint or redistribute altered or excerpted
materials will be granted on a case-by-case basis; all requests must be made in writing to USADA.

29

